Jack is a Field Technician for a small renovation contractor, specializing in finishing construction aspects including trim work, tiling, grouting, and cabinetry. He began working there one and a half years ago with no industry experience and has learned about the trades on the job. This is Jack’s first job in construction but at 22 years old he has experience as a line cook and has previously attended business school. 
The firm Jack works for is very small and contracts out a lot of work because it is more cost effective to hire specialists than employ them full time as needs change on a job to job basis. The business currently has four employees, the owner, the owner’s son, another skilled tradesman, and Jack. A year and a half ago there were three additional employees, but they have since left without replacement. 
This paper will attempt to analyze two organizational behaviour theories, motivation, and team cohesion, as they apply to Jack. The report will be divided as such and conclusions about each theory’s relationship with each other, Jack, and his employer will be made. Jack was chosen for this interview and report because of his openness, honesty, and passion for his work. Over the past year and a half Jack has gone from leaving business school with no idea what he wanted to do to finding something that he is both passionate about and would like to pursue as a career. This paper will explain why and how this happened.
Motivation
Jack initially got his job with the construction firm through a connection his mom had developed from recruiting for the owner in the past. Prior to the job offer Jack had never considered a role in construction before and had been attending business school. Talking with him now it is obvious that he is motivated, driven, and has a career path in mind. How did this occur? 
This paper will use several motivational theories to explain how Jack transformed over the past year and a half, the first of which is McClelland’s needs-based theory. According to McClelland, there are three basic needs motivating people, the need for achievement, affiliation, and power (McClelland, 1985). In his role at the construction firm, Jack has had all these needs fulfilled. As he has gained more responsibility Jack has been able to take on larger projects and see the results of his efforts. Jack recalled a story from a few months ago where he installed baseboard trim in half of a house that was so well done it saved his employer money as the painters did not have to bother caulking. Although it is a small team Jack also has great things to say about his coworkers. From his descriptions of them it is clear he has a respect for them and has developed close bonds. One of the reasons Jack enjoys working for his employer is the autonomy and trust provided by his boss. He has the power to control when and how he completes tasks if they are on time and to the correct standard.
The second theory of motivation developed by Adams in the 1960’s is known as Equity Theory. This theory suggests that workers compare their work inputs and outputs against their peers and respond to eliminate inequity (Adams et al., 1976). Jack describes the owner’s son as a workhorse and as someone who can concentrate all day on a task, and as an inexperienced member of the team Jack has modelled his work ethic after him. The owner has also done a good job managing Jack’s compensation from an equity theory perspective, having provided him a raise and more responsibilities as Jack has shown that his inputs have led to greater quality outcomes. Jack is aware and trusts that increasing the quality of his work will progress his career.
The compensation increase mentioned earlier is also an example of reinforcement theory. Jack provided several examples that relate to the application of this theory during the interview. Due to the respect he has for the praise provided by his boss, it is used sparingly and is meaningful. Along with the compensation and responsibility increase, these make up the ways that behaviour is positively reinforced within the organization. The owner is also willing to use punishments to end unwanted behaviour. When Jack accidentally damaged an expensive bathtub, he felt compelled and pressured to pay out of his own pocket for the damages despite there being no official requirement to do so. He did this out of concern fear of being fired or frozen out of additional responsibilities. 
The final motivation theory this paper will discuss is the goal setting theory as written by E.G. Latham and Kinne in 1974. This theory states that specific and difficult goals increase performance and persistence of effort (Latham & Kinne, 1974). The nature of the work performed by the construction firm means that every job has specific goals that Jack must strive towards. As an inexperienced worker with growing responsibilities, it has meant that every job provides Jack with new difficult goals to achieve. In addition to regular job specific goals he has also worked with his boss to discuss his career aspirations and now has specific goals related to pursuing his passion for carpentry. 
Team Cohesion
One of the very first pieces of information Jack provided in our interview was that over the relatively short period of time he has worked for his employer he has witnessed a 43 percent turnover in staff. Despite this large number, when asked whether he would leave his current position for a similar one at another company Jack empathically declined.
Team cohesion includes two aspects: the calculative and the emotional. The calculative aspect refers to whether a team member believes that the team will be able to fulfill their goals and needs. Jack, as a relatively inexperienced worker, has goals involving building skills and pursuing a career in carpentry. As he grows in experience, he is regularly being provided new experiences by his superiors and therefore he has little doubt that the team is a good fit for him to achieve his goals. The same can be said about needs. As a young worker without dependents, Jack is happy with the compensation he receives, his work life balance, and the physical toll of the work he performs. On the other hand, for the skilled tradesmen who left the company, the same aspects of calculative cohesion may not have been met. Jack’s employer was not willing to pay at least one of the tradesmen a market comparable rate and there was little opportunity for them to improve their existing skills in the small specialized firm. 
In terms of the emotional aspect of cohesion, Jack is again more entrenched than the tradesmen who left. Jack has a great deal of respect for his boss, the feedback he provides, and the way he runs the business and trusts his employees. Jack’s mother is friends with his boss and the interactions he has with his coworkers give him a sense of belonging. For the tradesmen who left who were recruited through an agency, they may have had different relationships with the owner and their coworkers. As a new employee Jack is able to point out some flaws with the work speed of one of his coworkers. For more experienced workers flaws like this are more easily identifiable. Pairing workplace frustrations with the observation that Jack mentioned that he never sees his coworkers outside of work, for workers without the profound respect Jack has, may be a contributing cause for the emotional aspect of cohesion to not develop.
Conclusions
Motivation and team cohesion are comprehensively linked. If a team can provide a platform to achieve goals, fulfill needs, and form the basis of a social identity, workers like Jack will feel motivated to apply themselves and improve the quality of their work. However, motivated individuals create the conditions for teams with high cohesion. Jack’s effort to learn and improve signalled the team to support him. Every step of Jack’s career so far has been provided to him because his superiors recognize that he is willing to put the work in and is passionate. As Jack’s goals are beginning to change and he looks to become a skilled carpenter, he may have to look elsewhere for opportunities. However, unlike some of his departed colleagues, if he does leave, he will do so with the support of coworkers and the connections he has made. Jack has taught me that motivation starts internally and is supported by the organization. If I am motivated the people around me will be more than happy to help me achieve my goals. However, I have also learned from Jack that the environment I find myself in is not something that is forced upon me. How I act, interact, and support, can create a huge change in how the team as a whole works with and supports each other.
